---
title: 'So, You Want to Go to Graduate School?'
date: 2030-08-01
permalink: /posts/2026/08/blog-post-1
tags:
  - graduate school
  - tutorial
---

## Types of Degrees

Let's go over some types of graduate degrees. 

### Doctor of Philosophy (PhD)

A PhD is a research-oriented degree in which a candidate ultimately completes a dissertation: a body of original, novel research, which is "defended" in front of (a.k.a., presented to and questioned by) a panel of experts in the field. The duration of a PhD heavily depends on the field and program, but averages tend to fall between 4 and 7 years. In the United States, PhD degrees also have coursework requirements, which are generally completed within the first 1 to 3 years of the program. Additionally, for almost all programs in the United States, students are not required to have a Master's in order to be accepted into a PhD program.

A PhD is completed under the guidance of a faculty advisor, who will help formulate your dissertation research project and provide unique feedback and insight on your work. Ideally, your research interests and your faculty advisor's field of expertise will overlap. You will also be supported by fellow members of the group, including post-docs and other graduate students, as well as other faculty members in your department and broader field. 

PhD students do NOT pay for their degree! In fact, they are paid a stipend while completing their degree (as of 2026, between $23,000 and $40,000, depending on local cost of living and university funding). Usually, this stipend comes out of their faculty advisor's funding. An advisor with insufficient funding may have students take on Teaching Assistantship (TA) positions to earn a stipend, or apply for fellowships. Some PhD programs require students to TA in the first and/or second year to earn their stipend regardless of advisor funding. However, bottom line, PhD students do not pay tuition the way undergraduate or Master's students do. For this reason, it is useful to think of a PhD program as an "entry level job" to a research career, rather than traditional schooling.

PhD degrees are often required for employment as a university professor or research scientist. They may also increase your base pay or allow for better promotion opportunities at certain companies or organizations. However, this may make you "overqualified" for other positions.  

### Master's Degree

A Master's degree is awarded to students who complete a program demonstrating mastery of a specific field of study (more specialized than an undergraduate major). There are many types of Master's programs, including a "Course-based Master's", where a student obtains their Master's by completing a series of coursework, or a "Thesis Master's", in which a student completes a dissertation with a faculty advisor (smaller in scale compared to a PhD dissertation). Other programs, such as a Master of Business Administration (MBA) or a Master of Education, are designed for certain career paths. Master's degrees typically take 2 years to complete. 

Master's degrees cost tuition, and there are far fewer opportunities for financial aid or scholarships compared to undergraduate and doctoral programs. [In 2024, the average cost of a Master's degree was $62,820](https://educationdata.org/average-cost-of-a-masters-degree#:~:text=The%20average%20cost%20of%20a%20Master's%20degree%20is%20%2451%2C740%20in,tuition%20and%20fees%2C%20per%20year). In some fields such as engineering, companies may offer to pay their employees' Master's degree tuition (with the understanding that the employee will continue to work at that company following their degree completion). 

A Master's degree may be required for certain careers and industries, and may also increase employability and promotability. A Master's degree can also give students experience in an area of research or department before committing to a PhD. 

### Medical Doctor-Doctor of Philosophy (MD-PhD)

An MD-PhD program allows a student to complete a medical doctorate and a PhD degree within the span of 6 to 8 years. This may be desirable for students interested in the intersection between scientific research and patient care. Many MD-PhD programs earn their PhDs in disciplines such as cell biology, biochemistry, genetics, immunology, and neuroscience. It is worth noting that MD-PhD programs are highly competitive, moreso than medical school, which is more competitive than most PhD programs. 

MD-PhD programs provide a stipend and tuition scholarships like traditional PhD programs. Some MD-PhD programs require students to TA in the first year. 

Most MD-PhD graduates work in academic medical centers, such as medical schools or teaching hospitals, or at research institutes such as the National Institute of Health or other government or private agencies. 

## What Degree is Right for You? 

It's important 

## Beginning Your Search

To begin your search for graduate schools, you may wish to consider:

- The specific research subfields you want to pursue PhD-level research in
- The departments which contain that subfield of research
- Recommendations from colleagues 
- Let's go through these items one by one. 

### Deciding Research Subfields

Professor Matt Might of the University of Alabama at Birmingham has a great illustrated guide to a PhDLinks to an external site.. It highlights the point that a PhD is a degree in a research question, not a general subject. An undergraduate major in chemistry, for example, will have you explore a broad range of chemistry subjects, from organic chemistry, to environmental chemistry, to laboratory techniques in chemistry. Not all of these courses may be relevant to your future career. A PhD in chemistry might be earned by spending 5 years of research on one type of molecule. So whatever you want to pursue your PhD in, it's best if you find it really interesting!

It is not necessary to know the exact topic or question you wish to pursue your dissertation research in prior to applying to graduate school. Many graduate students end up switching their area of research in their first few years to begin with. However, the more you know about yourself and what you want to study, the more efficient your school searching will be. 

It is also not necessary to pursue graduate research in the same area of research you pursued in undergrad. First, research skills in any field are always transferable in some form. Attention to detail, time management, data analysis, and programming abilities are useful for any research group, even if the contexts are completely different. Second, every graduate student works through some kind of learning curve at the beginning of their degree. If yours results from switching departments or subfields, that's completely okay! For interdisciplinary research groups, students with experience in a variety of research areas may be especially valued.

A great way to learn about the different types of research subfields is to look at the titles of advanced courses in your department. You may also want to visit your department's faculty website to see what other professors are studying besides your current research advisor. If you enjoy your current area of research, you may want to ask colleagues what subfield your work is contained under, or what subfields are tangentially related to it.

Once you have an idea of what's out there, you may find it useful to write a short, non-binding list of research areas you'd be interested in pursuing your PhD in. This can be as specific or general as is relevant to you. Think about what gets you excited as a researcher. Is it the intellectual challenge of a research question? Is it the research's potential to help others? Is it the skills you use on a day-to-day basis that's most fun for you?

You may also want to consider your long-term career goals in deciding your area of study. What areas of research will relevant for industry in 10 years? If you are looking to train a specific skill (e.g. writing good political polling questions), what research area will allow you to practice that skill the most?

### Deciding Departments

Now that you have a few research subfields in mind, we can revisit what department you wish to obtain your PhD in. A research subfield may be represented by different or multiple departments, depending on the university. For example, research in nuclear fusion is usually included under the Physics department. However, some universities have a dedicated Nuclear Engineering department. Others may have faculty in Electrical or Mechanical Engineering who work on the same projects as those Physics professors. 

Be aware that the same type of research may have different names or keywords associated with it, especially between different departments. For example, if you wanted to study machine learning for robotics applications, you might look up "Artificial Intelligence" among Computer Science departments, and "Autonomous Systems" among Aerospace Engineering departments. 

In thinking about what excites you about your research, you may find yourself in a completely different department than you'd expect. For example, if you enjoy Environmental Science, but your primary motivation is having better laws to protect the environment, you may want to study Public Policy instead of Environmental Science. 

### Recommendations from Colleagues

The graduate school application process does not have to be completed alone! Use every resource and connection at your disposal to help you find the PhD program that's right for you. 

Lab mates, your faculty advisor, and your McNair Scholars mentor are all great people to reach out to about potential places to apply. They may also offer more insight into the overall environment of the graduate program, what faculty members you should look out for, and what research areas are likely to see funding in the upcoming years.

In general, it is better to cast your net wide when it comes to graduate schools. In these discussions, also ask how many schools they applied to/are applying to to gauge the average number of schools someone in your field applies to. 

### Forming Your List of Schools

Now that you've looked at a few schools, it's time to decide which are worth serious consideration. When deciding which graduate programs to apply to (not which program you'll ultimately accept), you may wish to consider:

- Availability of suitable faculty advisors 
- Location
- Rigor of application
- Well-roundedness of list

Notice university ranking is not on this list! University ranking lists are highly subjective and cannot fully represent a school's quality or prestige. This is even more true for graduate programs, where schools can specialize in any number of research subfields via the faculty they hire. For example, one school might be ranked very high for their Physics program, but that Physics program may be highly focused on one field, say, astrophysics. If you wanted to specialize in something else, like high energy physics, you may be better off elsewhere. 

Let's go through these criteria one by one.

### Availability of Suitable Faculty Advisors

As discussed previously, it's important to pick a school with faculty that specializes in the field of study you want to pursue your graduate degree in. However, finding exactly one professor that shares similar research interests to you, and applying to the school only for that professor, can be risky. Said professor may not have funding or time available to take on an additional graduate student. They may plan on retiring or taking sabbatical soon. Or, their advising style may not work well with you. 

Many of these questions can be answered by asking the professor directly. It is common (and HIGHLY recommended*) for graduate applicants to reach out to and set up a meeting with potential advisors during the fall semester prior to the application deadline. Students can then ask questions about the direction of the professor's research in the upcoming years, the availability of funding, research group expectations, etc. before submitting an application. If a student is admitted to a graduate program, they will also have the opportunity to meet and chat with faculty of interest prior to accepting the program offer, i.e. at visitation or open house events. 

Even still, it is difficult to predict whether a faculty advisor relationship will work out perfectly before a student enters a research group. Thus, it is helpful to have multiple options for faculty advisors at each university you apply to. Multiple suitable advisors may also increase your chances of being admitted to a program. Furthermore, it also means you will have multiple faculty experts nearby to turn to when pursuing your PhD. The Graduate School Matrix recommends you have 2 to 3 potential faculty of interest per school you apply to. 

*Reaching out to faculty prior to application submission is effectively a "secret" section of the graduate application. There will be an option to write which faculty members you'd consider working with on graduate applications. When reviewing your application, the committee will then ask those faculty members whether they'd consider working with you, if so, it has a reasonable impact on whether your application is accepted. A professor is simply more likely to work with someone they've met and gotten along with over someone they haven't met at all, even if it was only for 15 minutes over Zoom. Reaching out also shows initiative and interest in their work, even if the faculty member is unable to meet with you. So, in almost all cases, it is better to reach out to faculty than not. 

The Grad School Matrix includes a "Correspondence with Faculty" section for this purpose. However, a majority of students reach out to potential faculty advisors in early Fall. Therefore, you are not expected to fill out this section during this course.

### Location

Location plays a major role in a majority of prospective graduate students' final acceptance decision. Location may determine how often you visit home, how expensive the cost of living will be (this is related to the stipend amount your program would provide), the yearly weather cycles, what activities there are to do outside of research and coursework, what local communities you'll be a part of, etc.

On acceptance into a PhD program, you will usually have the opportunity to visit the university (paid for by the department), where they'll show you around town and allow you to get a feel for the environment. Until that point, however, it is best to only apply to programs at locations you'd at least consider living in. If you absolutely despise cold, windy winters, then the coastal northeast would not be a good option. However, if you'd be willing to put up with it for the right school, it may be worth applying still. 

### Rigor of Application

A lengthy, pricey application with lots of requirements may be more effort than its worth. For example, during the pandemic, many schools removed the GRE requirement for graduate applications (in some states, it was completely impossible to schedule a GRE exam in-person, so those students could not take the exam at all!) Now, some schools may have added that requirement back. This may not make applying to the school worth it, especially if they require a subject GRE exam, as studying for a subject GRE exam can be the equivalent of taking another 3-credit course in terms of hours spent.

Fee waivers are also an option at many schools. For some schools, like CU Boulder, a fee waiver requires the application be submitted earlier than the department-specific deadline. Others may not list fee waiver information online, in which case you may need to contact a department staff member. 

### Well-roundedness of List

A well-rounded list of graduate programs will have schools of varying application competitiveness. A list containing only Ivy League schools, for example, is not well-rounded as a majority of departments at those universities have very competitive graduate programs with few slots. 

You can roughly gauge the competitiveness of a graduate program by its program size (i.e. the number of graduate students they accept per year, or their total number of graduate students) and the perceived prestige of the overall program (school rankings may be useful here). You may also want to investigate how competitive your desired research group is by looking at the number of students the faculty of interest currently has, as well as the popularity or prestige of their research activities.

As a reminder, these are only recommended criteria for simply applying to a school. Criteria for accepting a graduate school's offer will naturally be more selective. You are also getting a head start on your graduate applications, meaning there is plenty of time to decide throughout the summer and fall semester. Don't worry about having everything figured out, we're mostly looking to get the ball rolling!
